  Ogho Okiti | Wednesday, 22 November 2017  9:56am  | opinion According
 to the timeline set by the Kaduna State government, applications for 
teachers wanting to replace the planned sack of about 25,000 teachers 
that failed the competency tests set by the government ended yesterday. 
 As expected, over that number has applied to take the positions of the 
laid-off teachers. While
 the dust has fairly settled on the episode, this is still a good time 
to look at the planned sack from a public policy and reform perspective.
 To start with, unlike many Twitter and Facebook strollers, I was not 
entirely shocked, nor surprised about the outcome of the competency 
tests conducted by the government of Kaduna State for the public school 
teachers in the State. For many years, our public schools have been 
centers of mediocrity, intergenerational backwardness, and a destination
 for the life sentence of ignorance and stupidity. Nigeria’s public 
education has often faced poor enrollment rates, with those that attend 
not learning, and only a few with knowledge of how to read or solve 
basic numerical problems or the ability to even interact intelligently. Worse
 still, this does not only apply to primary and secondary schools.  A 
large section of the students produced by our universities, given their 
poor background, sometimes find it tedious to interact intelligently and
 solve basic problems in the office. It
 is thus understandable if someone, in this case, the governor of Kaduna
 State, Nasir El Rufai, wants to do something about it and change the 
trajectory of the future generation of children, most of them from poor 
homes, growing up in Kaduna. However, the success of such reforms, as 
important as they are, will depend also on the process. In pubic policy,
 as I have argued in many instances, the end does not justify the means.
 To build enduring institutions, process can even be more important than
 immediate outcomes. Following
 the protests from the Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC) and the Nigeria 
Union of Teacher (NUT), Kaduna government released samples scripts of 
the competency tests failed by 75% of the 25,000 that took the tests. 
After the public outcry that followed the release, it appears the Kaduna
 State government has outwitted the organized labour in this public 
relations battle. For organized labour, it made the matter worse when 
the appalling and ironic statement that “examination is not a true test 
of knowledge” was credited to one of the labour unionists. However,
 notwithstanding the state of Nigeria’s education and public schools, it
 is very easy to call for the sack of the teachers. Indeed, it will be 
very convenient despite the protests from the NLC and the NUT, given 
that the weight of public opinion is with the State government. However,
 I disagree on the sack, and I will attempt to articulate my reasons. I
 do not think sacking 25,000 teachers at a go and immediately will 
present the best platform for an enduring reform on education in the 
state. Perhaps the Kaduna State Government has a plan and a system that 
I’m not aware of, my stance is that sacking teachers and replacing them 
with others in the absence of a holistic and comprehensive plan and 
alteration to the system, including recruitment, will mean failure. 
Without modifying the system that produces such pedantic teachers, 
replacing them will not take us far. What is in place to sustain the 
change and modify along the line? Also,
 a system that criminalizes the majority is an unworkable system. The 
competency tests, which I am not aware how much time the teachers were 
given to prepare for, or whether they were told the consequences, but 
any system that criminalizes the majority cannot be said to have done 
all possible to protect the vulnerable. The teachers that failed the 
competency tests are products of a failed system, and though they have 
contributed to that failed system, it is unfair for them to carry the 
entire can for the failure. In Kaduna, as in all other areas of public 
service in Nigeria, jobs are seen as a social entitlement, a crass 
opportunity to collect monthly largess, and many do not see, nor 
recognizes the corresponding responsibilities expected of them. This is 
the Nigeria they know, and this is a system they are used to. To usher 
in an effective and enduring change, the process, though may appear not 
to provide a quick result, must be thorough and potentially enduring. I 
do not see how the sacking 75% of the teachers in one fell swoop can be 
justified if all other necessary measures to curtail the number and 
minimize disruption in the schools have not been adopted. Another
 reason why I do not support the sacking of over 25,000 teachers is that
 there are not 25,000 teachers in Kaduna State with extensive, detailed,
 and relevant training. The State is already in an advanced stage of 
replacing the failed teachers, but these new recruits are not ready-made
 teachers.  Therefore, if the State would be very happy to train new 
teachers, the same opportunity should apply to old teachers. Having then
 provided the training, provided the criteria for teacher recruitment 
and development in the State, it becomes transparent who cannot make the
 grade. But then, it will definitely not be 75% of the teachers. And
 that brings me to the final point. Education reform is beyond tests and
 recruitment. It is an entire and consistent process of recruitment 
standards, trainings and retraining, accountability, and responsibility.
 According to Jamie Saveerda, Senior Director, Education Global Practice
 of the World Bank, there are three critical ingredients of successful 
education reform. First, well designed policies that contain incentive 
mechanisms for everyone connected to education, especially teachers. 
Second, the institutions that support education and learning must be 
effective. Third, and very important, there must a political alignment 
around education reforms, so that everyone recognizes that the sole 
purpose of education reform is the improvement of student learning 
across all tiers and social backgrounds. I can only hope that the Kaduna
 State reforms increasingly meets the criteria.