  Ayuba Iliya | Wednesday, 29 November 2017  12:42pm  | opinion The
 resignation of former vice President, Atiku Abubakar, on the eve of his
 birthday did not come as a surprise to not only political analyst but 
even those who have been following the news, vis-a-vis his political 
history. The
 former vice president has lamented the disregard he has experienced 
under the APC-led government, especially considering that he was a 
pillar its building process. In
 an interview with the Voice America, Atiku was quoted saying: “Honestly
 speaking, I’m still a member of the APC; I was part of all the 
processes, including campaigns until success was achieved. “But
 sadly, soon after the formation of government; I was side-lined, I have
 no any relationship with the government, I’ve not been contacted even 
once to comment on anything and in turn, I maintained my distance. They 
used our money and influence to get to where they’re but three years 
down the lane, this is where we are,” His claims became even more glaring to onlookers when his company, Intels, was delisted from the government’s contractors list. According
 to media reports President Muhammadu Buhari had earlier in April 
approved the recommendations of the Attorney-General of the Federation, 
Abubakar Malami, breaking the near-monopoly of Mr. Atiku’s Intels in the
 handling of oil and gas cargoes in the country. These materialized on September 27,
 when Mr. Malami, wrote to the Managing Director of NPA, Hadiza 
Bala-Usman, directing her to terminate the boats pilotage monitoring and
 supervision agreement that the agency had with Intels, saying that the 
contract was illegal. While
 it is easy to assume that Atiku’s defection was selfish, as many 
partisan politicians say, it is important to see the man beyond the 
‘bread and butter politician’ he is perceived to be. The
 determination and qualities of leadership in Atiku are better 
appreciated looking at his rise from penury to plenty, even before he 
became a full time player in the Nigerian political scene. Childhood Born
 on November 25, 1946 to a Fulani trader and farmer Garba Abubakar, and 
his second wife, Aisha Kande, in Jada village of Adamawa State, Atiku, 
the only surviving child of his family was never meant to succeed. Atiku’s
 father was opposed to western education, but through fate Atiku was 
discovered by the authorities and was enrolled in Jada Primary School at
 the age of eight. Atiku proceeded to the Adamawa Provincial Secondary 
School, Yola in the year 1960 where he obtained his West African School 
Certificate. Adulthood Although
 Atiku got into the Nigerian Police College, in Kaduna, the defector in 
him began to manifest when he jilted the college for a work as a Tax 
Officer in the then Regional Ministry of Finance, where he laid the 
foundation for the business tycoon he is to become. Either
 for his interest in science of by fate, Atiku obtained a diploma at the
 School of Hygiene Kano in 1966 and was later admitted at the Ahmadu 
Bello University on a scholarship to study law, where he graduated in 
1969 and got employed in the Nigerian Custom Service. Marriage Life Atiku’s
 attraction could lure a woman, his first wife, Titilayo Albert who 
married him despite her parents disapproval for the union. In
 January 1979 he married Ladi Yakubu as his second wife and they had six
 children: Abba, Atiku, Zainab, Ummi-Hauwa, Maryam and Rukayatu. Four years later,
 Atiku the ‘son of a nobody’ married Princess Rukaiyatu, daughter of the
 late Lamido of Adamawa as his third wife, with whom he has seven 
children including; Aisha, Hadiza, Aliyu, Asmau, Mustafa, Laila and 
Abdulsalam. In
 1986, he married his fourth wife, Fatima Shettima, who also gave birth 
to seven children namely; Amina (Meena), Mohammed and two sets of twins 
Ahmed and Shehu, Zainab and Aisha, and Hafsat. Atiku
 Abubakar eventually divorced Ladi, and got married to Jennifer 
Iwenjora, who later changed her name to Jamila Atiku-Abubakar. She gave 
birth to Abdulmalik, Zara and his youngest child, Faisal. Married
 to five wives, the former vice president made sure he observed the 
federal character, having two of his wife’s from the South west and 
South East being a Northerner. Public Service As
 an officer in the Nigerian Custom, Atiku Abubakar was posted to 
Idi-Iroko, a border town between Nigeria and Benin Republic. He was in 
charge of the Lagos Airport, Apapa Ports, Ibadan Customs Command between
 1974 and 1979. He
 later moved to the North where he served in the Kano Command in 1976, 
to Maiduguri (as Area Comptroller) in  1977, Kaduna in 1980 and back to 
the Apapa Ports in 1982. Atiku was promoted to the post of a Deputy 
Director in charge of Enforcement and Drugs in 1987. When
 he turned 43 in 1989, Atiku voluntarily retired from the Nigerian 
Customs Service, subsequently engaging in different businesses, 
including real estate, agriculture, trading, buying and selling. As a 
beverage manufacturer, Atiku owns a beverage manufacturing plant in 
Yola, as well as an animal feed factory. Political Career As
 if all of his life experiences were building him up for a bigger public
 service, Atiku’s encounter with Shehu Musa Yar’Adua, who was then the 
second-in-command of the military government, changed the cause of his 
political career. Yar’Auda
 would often carry Atiku along to political meetings, which were 
critical to Atiku becoming the National Vice-Chairman of the Peoples 
Front of Nigeria. Atiku
 participated in the transition program initiated by then Head of State,
 Ibrahim Babangida, and was later elected to represent his constituency 
at the 1989 Constituent Assembly. He also won the primary election to 
contest for the gubernatorial election under the platform of Social 
Democratic Party in 1991 but was disqualified by government from 
contesting the elections. The
 selfless leader in Atiku manifested when he stepped down for the late 
MKO Abiola in the 1992 Presidential race. However, to compensate his 
sacrifice, Former President Olusegun Obasanjo choose Atiku as a running 
mate in the 1999 presidential election, despite his position as the then
 governor-elect of Adamawa state. Having
 served as vice-president of Nigeria under Obabsanjo, Atiku was chosen 
as the presidential candidate of the Action Congress (AC) in December 
2006. Although he didn’t win the election, Atiku came in third place, 
behind PDP candidate Umaru Yar’Adua and ANPP candidate Muhammadu Buhari,
 with approximately 7% of the vote (2.6 million votes). His
 determination to become President led him to re-contest in the 2011 
Presidential election alongside Ex-President. Goodluck Jonathan, and 
Sarah Jubril of the People’s Democratic Party. Although he lost, Atiku 
re-contested under the All Progressives Congress with President 
Muhammadu Buhari. Contribution As
 former Chairman National Council on Privatization, former Chief 
Coordinator of all public enterprises, and former Chairman of National 
Economic Revitalization Committee, Nigeria’s economic growth at the time
 could be attributed to his impact in the sector. Professor
 Kevin Nwogu in his citation on Atiku Abubakar on the occasion of the 
conferment of the Degree of Doctor of Letters (Honoris Causa) by the 
Federal University of Technology, Yola in 2002, said: “Atiku Abubakar 
effectively presides over all major national institutions responsible 
for economic policy formulation, implementation and coordination. “As
 the chairman of National Economic Council, he holds the major 
responsibility of steering the nation's economic mechanism, channeling 
efforts to optimize the opportunities of a potentially great country…” “As
 a result, Nigeria's economic growth has picked up for the first time in
 nearly a decade. From a negative growth the economy is now at 3% and 
from a depleted foreign reserve of just above 2.6 billion dollars twenty
 three months ago, it is now over 10billion dollars”.