 NASS should resuscitate the recent National Confab reports to give us the needed direction toward a lasting solution Editorial | Tuesday, 27 June 2017  10:59am  | opinion War does no
one any good. In most cases, after all the destructions and slaughter,
aggrieved parties to a war wind up at the roundtable. We believe that as the
drums of war beat feverishly in Nigeria, everybody must put their hands on deck
to ensure the impending disaster is averted. And it is doable. Nigeria is
not new to self-induced crises in its traumatic trajectory since it emerged
from the shadows of British imperialism in 1960. The country has experienced a
deluge of socio-political upheavals, which rocked it close to its foundation
several times. The most disastrous
so far was the 30-month civil war in which over two million souls are believed
to have perished. Now, the
country is again tottering to the precipice as the centrifugal forces
threatening to tear it apart have become more audacious. The drums of
war are sounding so loud now that even the deaf can hear them. On Tuesday 6
June 2017, a largely anonymous coalition of northern youths, issued a
three-month ultimatum to the people of Igbo extraction to vacate the region or
face dire consequences. The
ultimatum expires on 1 October. It has
elicited varied reactions, ranging from condemnation to brazen support for the
amorphous northern groups to Niger Delta militants responding with a call on
Northerners to lay off oil blocks in the region, and that they would declare
independence for that zone on 1 October. Fortunately,
the latest position of the Coalition of Northern Youths, appears even more
conciliatory. In their
letter to the Acting President, Yemi Osinbajo, they asked him to allow Ndigbo
to go and have Biafra Republic. The group said though they laud the peace and
conflict resolution moves being done by the Acting President, they doubted their
efficacy in bringing a lasting solution to the problems rocking the nation at
present. In the
letter signed by Ambassador Shettima Yerima, Joshua Viashman, Aminu Adam,
Abdul-Azeez Suleiman and Nastura Ashir Sharif, the Northern groups argued that
the principle of self-determination has since World War II become a part of the
United Nations Charter, which states in Article 1(2) that one of the purposes
of the UN is “to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples.” They
called for a referendum to determine just what the various peoples of Nigeria
want with regards to our coexistence. We think this is a signal that the North, which has
been the part of the country less enthusiastic about having a national dialogue
or conference, is now ready to talk about the fate of Nigeria. This fact – that the North was beginning to see the
need for some kind of restructuring – seems to be a welcome one, one that will
eventually pave the way for true resolution of the multifarious multi-ethnic
and religious cleavages that have threatened the peace and unity of the country
in the recent past. So, contrary to what is believed in some quarters,
if we discountenance the so-called quit notice to the Igbo in the North, what
the Northern youths have indicated is a readiness for the nation to talk and
possibly resolve the many areas of perpetual disagreement and tension in an
amicable and peaceful manner. We need to talk, and if necessary amend the Nigerian
constitution to include a referendum that will enable us determine the true
feelings of citizens and regions and how we want to govern ourselves in a way
that will engender greater peace and understanding. And – hopefully – this will bring about more development
that will be acceptable and beneficial to all segments of the society. It
happened in the First Republic; it can happen again. Most of the requirements for resolving the areas of discount
are already entrenched in the 2014 National Conference report, although not as
far-reaching as some would expect. For the avoidance of doubt, we prefer that Nigeria
remains one country, but since the recommendations of the 2014 conference can
be a starting point toward restructuring it in a more equitable and acceptable
way, all Nigerians should back Senate President Bukola Saraki’s call for the
executive to send the conference report to the legislature. In fact, we suggest that the lawmakers
resuscitate the 2006 National
Political Reform Conference inaugurated by Olusegun Obasanjo that was abandoned
simply because of the Third Term issue, and study it along with that of 2014 in
order to give us the needed direction to finding a lasting solution to our
predicament. The outcome of that exercise may not be Eldorado but
it could and should go a long way in getting us off the cliff and setting us
firmly on the path to building a greater nation of peace, equity, love and
justice for all.