 A comparison of developments in Nigeria and America Caleb Lean | Friday, 16 June 2017  7:30pm  | opinion The landing
of the Mayflower on the shores of
Virginia, Massachusetts, in 1620 is celebrated every year by Americans to mark
a remembrance of the Pilgrim Fathers who crossed the uncharted waters of Europe
for a fresh start in the New World. It also
marks the birth of America as the first free market economy with “We the people”, the famous starting
words of the U.S Constitution. This document promotes liberty and guarantees
the three critical elements that make a free market: ownership of private
property, a competitive market, and unregulated prices. By
enshrining these tenets into the constitution, the founding fathers set America
on the path to becoming the most prosperous nation in the world for over 300
years. While many countries have sought to adopt its model, few have had the
historic rate of economic growth over a long-term period. Their
attempts, nonetheless, saw the world surge forward in technology, industry,
transportation, trade, and ground-breaking innovations from the 18th
to 19th century. It is no surprise then that the proposed answer to
most of today’s pressing challenges, from global warming to poverty, is more
free markets. Indeed, the
dilemma surrounding the role of governments in Africa’s quest for growth has led
to the consensus on the solution to the continent’s manifold challenges
shifting from “democracy” to “entrepreneurship”. It is similar
to the arguments presented in The Wealth
of Nations (1776), in which Adam Smith argues that for a society to truly
prosper it needs less and less government and more free enterprise. He
restricts the government’s role to these core functions: maintaining defence,
keeping law and order, building infrastructure and promoting education. Unfortunately,
over time, the Nigerian government has proven to be incapable in fulfilling
even these core functions, leaving a lacuna gradually filled by private enterprise.
What has resulted is a system in which the laws of demand and supply are
responsible for determining who gets quality healthcare, education,
transportation, security, water supply, electricity, and housing. Making phone
calls to distant parts of the world was not always as straightforward as it is
now. At the turn of the millennium, the world was experiencing a telecommunications
revolution due to the advent of GSM. NITEL, the government owned telecommunications
operator in existence at the time, enjoyed a lengthy monopoly as the first
telecoms operator in the country since establishment in
1985 after running as Posts and Telegraphs (P&T) over several decades. However, it
was largely inefficient – more than 40% of phone lines were not operational; tariffs
were high, installation of landline telephones cost as much as $800 at a time
when the average monthly income in Nigeria was about $400, leaving those who
couldn’t afford their own landlines to wait on long queues to make phone calls. The
teledensity at the time was one phone line to about 440 people, below the
International Telecommunications Union’s (ITU) recommended minimum of one phone
line per 100 people. As the GSM revolution rang its way across Africa at
cheaper costs, the monopoly of NITEL came under threat. It collapsed in year 2000,
opening the country up for operators such as MTN and ECONET to awaken what is
now the fastest growing telecommunications market in Africa. Nature, we
are told, abhors a vacuum. The case of NITEL illustrates systemic failures that
have weakened public institutions over time and the attendant outsourcing to
private companies that has followed. The roles
Adam Smith envisions for governments in modern day society are important and indispensable
to the proper functioning of any state. Abdicating these roles is certain to
lead to unrest at every turn. It is recorded that of the 1.7 million people who
sat for the JAMB examinations in May, there are just 850,000 available slots in
public universities to absorb them. Despite the
yearly increase in the number of people who sit for JAMB, little has been done
to address the carrying capacity of public universities. The alternatives for
the scores of people denied admission are not promising. The tuition fees of
many private universities could be as high as a million naira per session, a
non-option for the bulk of admission seekers who are from low-income families. The same is
the case across board; adequate security, comfortable housing, safe drinking
water, good roads, quality healthcare, and standard education are available,
but only to the few who can afford them. It is business. That most
Nigerians are priced out of quality service and a good standard of living is
due not least to the high cost of doing business in a
“bring-your-own-infrastructure” environment. Nigeria is ranked 169 among 190
economies in the most recent World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business index. And for good
reason; the corporate regulatory framework is cumbersome, businesses are taxed
unscrupulously, and many firms have to bear the huge costs of powering their
businesses themselves. In the bid to profit, most businesses would rather
markup their prices than make them competitive. Of course this
spells ”disenfranchisement” for 60% of the country who live below the poverty
line, many of whom yearn for the lofty private schools with vast football
fields and laboratories and the private hospitals where they don’t have to wait
on long queues before being attended to. The
alternative available to them is subsidized government housing, government
schools, government hospitals, and government electricity, which, many times,
are not even there. Successive governments have not been successful in ridding
state-run organizations of the same problems which led to NITEL’s demise. With a
population three times larger than South Africa’s, Nigeria generates just a
tenth as much electricity. If the national grid was our only source of power we
would likely not be in existence today. When we consider Public Private
Partnerships (PPP) we think of roads, bridges, and airports. It hardly occurs
to us that our entire country might be one.