  Ogho Okiti | Thursday, 15 June 2017  5:21pm  | opinion Andrew
Palmer, in his book, “The New Pirates”, described Nigeria as an “archetype of
the predatory state”. The
motivation for this cruel conclusion is that the Nigerian elite, chief amongst
whom are politicians and political office holders, “does not consume the
population as prey, but rather consumes the resources of the population”. Accordingly,
the sole motivation for the pursuit of power is not for the purpose of the use
of the corresponding responsibilities for Nigeria’s prosperity, but the accumulation
of personal wealth and influence. In the last
two years, following the arrival of "change” on our political scene, the
style and the rhetoric obviously have changed, but even the most optimistic of
the proponents of change and the supporters of the All Progressives Congress
(APC) in the 2015 elections would agree that little else has changed – new
pirates have emerged. After the
2015 elections, the APC not only captured the Presidency and ended 16 years of
the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) rule, but also control about two-thirds of
the States. In these two years, they have visibly demonstrated that change in
parties, personalities, and rhetorics are not necessarily the solution to
Nigeria’s problems. I suspect my
description of the government will appear unfair to many of its supporters.
After all, in two years, following the most vigorous campaign against
corruption, the government has kept its promise to fight corruption. First, it
went after those that enriched themselves from the PDP election finance pool,
especially those that benefitted from the largesse of the former National
Security Adviser (NSA), Sambo Dasuki. It has followed up with those that
enriched themselves through their positions as Governors, Ministers, and/or
heads of agencies of government, and their families, friends, and
cronies. However,
while the dramatic approach to fighting corruption has its successes, the
impact on the long-term fight against the problem is at best tenuous. Given that a
good number of change mongers are desperate to justify the choice made in 2015,
they are quick to refer to the visible fight against corruption, especially
before this current government, and the mind-boggling revelations it has
thrown up. However, to
understand the frustrations of many Nigerians, including the dwindling numbers
of the supporters of President Muhammadu Buhari, there is a need to understand
that the vote for change was not meant to be an incremental (arguably, for that
matter) performance on the administration of President Jonathan, but that
change means change in the ways we have always done things. And I have no doubt
that it is the failure to understand this enormous responsibility that is
responsible for the gulf in the rhetoric of the government and the reality on
the ground. Those that
campaigned and voted for PMB relied on two important considerations – the
strength of character to fight corruption, and the political will to be strong
on national security. These features are underpinned by the perception that
President Buhari would be a strong leader, especially when President Jonathan
was perceived as a weak one. As a strong leader, he was expected to deal with
corruption decisively. PMB cannot
be said to have failed in comparison with his predecessors, especially in those
two considerations referred to above. But, unfortunately, he has not lived up
to the expectations that preceded and accompanied the victory of the 2015
elections. Perhaps
rarely understood by the Presidency is the fact that it was a view that, after
seeking to be President for over a decade in three successive elections, Buhari
was required to take Nigeria forward to a future of peace and prosperity. However, the
strength projected by the President has become his greatest weakness.
Inadvertently, he has projected in the last two years that he could do it
alone; no one else could be trusted. Consequently,
inadvertently, the last two years have been replete with the worst symptoms of
military misadventure and a fledging democracy, a throwback to Buhari's days as
a soldier at the helm of political power. First, we
have seen the worst forms of high-handedness and patrimony where only family
members, cronies or those with regional or religious affiliations are
appointed into serious positions in government. This is quite
unfortunate. Second, the
skewed manner of executing the anti-graft campaign that suggests only those in
opposition are corrupt. To make matters worse, not much has been done to reform
the judiciary, which that would have eliminated or at least reduced delays in
the efficient execution of the fight against corruption, thus ensure progress
in the institutional fight against corruption. Neither is the prosecutory
competence of the anti-corruption agencies good enough to win cases when they
should - and convincingly too. This has led to long-drawn legal battles and
avoidable loss of cases. Third, the
administration is still throwing up and, some will argue, furthering the
prevalent underlying dynamics of class, corruption, and ethnicity. Those that
argue this is the case point to the gross lopsidedness in all forms of
appointments, and cases of corruption such as that against the former Secretary
to the Government of the Federation and the secrecy in dealing with the
recovered US 46 million dollars in an Ikoyi apartment. No, these
kinds of matters are not new. They have always been part of our political and
economic history. The difference here is that the government campaigned on the
basis of change, and the country voted for that change - change from the
corruption and perceived inefficiency of the past. This is the
motivation for characterizing this government as the new pirates. Regrettably,
President Buhari has pursued his variant of Nigerian unity through the notion
that Abuja knows best. The mentality of "Abuja knows best" dictates
that there will be no reforms, and no changes to the way we are governed.
According to this mentality, all that is required for Nigeria’s growth and
development is that oil resources are spent better than they were. The main
beneficiaries and the motivation for “Abuja knows best” are the elite. They
share the oil and gas resources in the present and in the future. The style may
have changed, but the substance has not. It is not
surprising, therefore, that two years after the most euphoric and unprecedented
victory in any Nigerian presidential election, Buhari’s performance has not
flattered him, when compared to all his predecessors. The mythical adoration
that trailed the victory may remain for some but the expectation of
miracles has not materialized. Going
forward, we do not require GEJ's type of Presidency that assumed that our
system had the checks and balances to guard against excesses. But we do not
also need the strong Presidency that cannot initiate extensive reforms in the political
and other spheres to cater to the needs of the citizenry. Neither do we need one that arbitrarily
selects appointees to public offices contrary to the federal character
principle enshrined in the constitution, and tramples on the rights of citizens,
making a mockery of democracy.