 President travels to Niger Monday Ayuba Iliya | Monday, 18 December 2017  10:51am  | news President Muhammadu Buhari on Monday reroute to Tahoua, Niger to attend the 59th Proclamation of Republic of Niger ceremony the presidency has disclosed on Sunday. Presidential spokesman, Garba Shehu in a statement said: “the President, alongside the Presidents of Mali, Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania and Niger, will participate in the historic event, held every year on December 18th to commemorate the founding of the Republic of Niger and creation of the Presidency. “After the ceremony, the Nigerian leader will hold bilateral meetings with some of his counterparts before returning to Abuja same day. “President Buhari will be accompanied on the trip by Governors Aminu Masari, Ibrahim Gaidam and Kashim Shettima of Katsina, Yobe and Borno States respectively” the statement said. This will make President Buhari’s fourth journey outside the country in 21 days, returning back to a fresh season of travels as earlier recorded during the beginning of his administration. President Buhari had on 27th November, travelled to Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire where he attended the 5th European Union-African Union (EU-AU) Summit. The governors of Akwa Ibom and Bauchi States and some ministers are among the top government officials that accompanied the President. Within the same week the president joined other Heads of State in Aqaba, Jordan, on 1st December, to review strategies in fighting terrorism, and reinforce joint security structures that will be more proactive in preventing attacks, the presidency reported. On the journey, Buhari was accompanied by the governors of Kogi, Osun and Niger States; the Ministers of Defence, Education, Foreign Affairs; the National Security Adviser, and the Acting Director-General of the National Intelligence Agency. This was followed by another trip last week to Paris, France where he joined over 50 world leaders in the One Planet Summit. The president was accompanied by the governors of Adamawa, Kano, and Ondo States as well as the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Environment. Apparently in each of the journey, the president doesn’t travel alone. Nigerians have in the past raised concerns about the Presidential journey and its cost implications on the nation’s treasury. According to an investigation by Sahara reporters, “A normal two-day long Buhari trip reportedly rates between $350K and $500K. For example, during the last presidential trip to Tehran, the capital of Iran, the travel expenses for accompanying presidency officials was $105K. Furthermore, transportation budgets stood at $45K, accommodation $200K, allowance $10K, contingency $20K, with media coverage costs at $10K. The Punch also reports that President Muhammadu Buhari and his Vice, Yemi Osinbajo will spend at least N1.3 billion on numerous trips, both foreign and local according to the 2018 budget. “The two Nigerian leaders will spend N968.4m on their foreign trips during the year, while their local trips will take N334m. Although the figure is N25m less than the preceding year, it does not include N182m allocated for both local and foreign trips in the budget of the State House Headquarters. In the 2017 budget, President Buhari foreign and local trips was estimated to cost N977m, while that of the Vice President Osinbajo is to cost N306m bringing the total to N1.28 billion. Presidential media aid, Lauretta Onochie has said that that the president has put in several measures to reduce the cost in running the activities of government. According to her, Buhari has limited the number of his entourage on foreign trips to essential personnels only. Adding that, No Federal Minister in Buhari's cabinet can travel out of Abuja without Buhari's say-so, thereby cutting down on wasteful spending associated with aimless travels. Buhari has ordered the sale of 2 presidential jets from a fleet of ten, and directed that some of the jets be transferred to the Air force for operational purposes thereby saving security agency the purchase cost of new jets, she also noted.