 Says PDP remains one Ayuba Iliya | Thursday, 21 December 2017  10:28am  | politics National Publicity Secretary of the People’s Democratic Party, Kola Ologbondinyan has said that the party is not worried by the emergence of a new faction of the party, saying the party remains one. Recall that a group of five men yesterday reportedly mounted flags of PDP in location in Asokoro, Abuja declaring it the new secretariat for the main opposition party. In a reaction, spokesman of PDP said the party is “completely unperturbed by the comical act of some individuals who make outlandish claims in the media regarding our party” According to a press statement issued earlier, Ologbondinyan said: “the fact is that we are happy with the efforts of the Governor Seriake Dickson-led Reconciliation Committee as well as the responses from all the respectable and responsible leaders of our party in that regard. “We will however not be responsible or respond to any person or groups of individuals who decide to allow themselves to be used by forces from another political party in a laughable and childish attempt to distract us “The PDP under the Prince Uche Secondus-led national leadership will continue to focus on repositioning our great party to be the formidable opposition that will guarantee checks and balances in our polity and ultimately regain power in 2019” the spokesman said As fallout of the recently concluded elective convention, the PDP have been witnessing series of controversies including a suit filed by one of the chairmanship aspirant at the Federal High Court Abuja seeking nullification of the convention. In the build up to the convention, at least seven chairmanship candidates saw the process as pre-arrange by some governors, consequently stepping down from the race. Two of the aspirants, Professor Tunde Adeniran and Raymond Dokpesi, who remained in the race rejected the outcome of the election, ahead of the voting, warning about the consequences to the party. One of the aspirants, Bode George had also accused the party of being bias against the South West where he hails from. He argued that the party leadership failed to implement the zoning principle earlier agreed upon. “The zoning principle, which was publicly reinforced last year in Port Harcourt, had specifically and rightly affirmed the South-West as the zone to produce the National Chairman. This binding proclamation was based on equity, fairness and natural balance that hold any organization together” Bode George said Adding: “It appears the PDP is now bent on self-destruction. It has obviously allowed money moguls to dictate its thematic largeness. The party has lost its soul. It has lost its principled beginning and the predications of righteousness. “It has traded the finer principles of democratic guidance and equity for the squalid, dirty and shameful resort to mercenary agenda where nothing matters save the putrid, oafish gains of the moment. “I cannot be part of this screaming aberration. And as the Atona of Yoruba land, I do not expect any well-meaning, well disciplined, forthright, sincere Omoluabi of Yoruba land to continue with this deceit and shameful theater. “The People’s Democratic Party has now mangled and distorted its soul and spirit. There is no morality here anymore. There is no sanity or any sense of enlightened civility” the aspirant has said.