 PDP caucus walked out of plenary in protest Ayuba Iliya | Tuesday, 19 December 2017  5:46pm  | politics The question of whether the People’s Democratic Party, PDP is divided came to the fore at the House of Representatives when a member, Nnanna Igbokwe, representing Ahiazu Mbaise/Ezinihitte federal constituency of Imo state cited division in the party as a reason for his defection to the All Progressives Congress. The debate took the centre stage against the backdrop of the rules of the House, giving precedence to make the defection of a member valid. Reading Igbokwe’s letter, notifying the house of his resignation from the PDP, the speaker of the House, Yakubu Dogara quoted the lawmaker saying: “I write to inform the Rt-Hon, speaker and my dear colleagues that I have since registered and join the All Progressives Congress since January 2017. “My decision to join the APC as at the time I did was as a result of the leadership crisis division that rocked the PDP. “You will recall that the judgement of the supreme court of Nigeria that finally resolved the crisis is delivered in July 2017, six months after I joined the APC. “Since January 2017 I have stopped attending all PDP caucus meeting in the National Assembly and also in my ward, LGA, state and national level” the letter reads The lawmaker said he has been attending all APC caucus meetings and functions in his ward, LGA, state and the national level and has been paying all party dues and levies, copies of which he attached to his letter. Igbokwe also cited crisis at the Imo state chapter of the PDP and the recent suit by the chairmanship aspirant in PDP convention, Taoheed Adedoja as evidence of the internal crisis rocking the party. However in a swift reaction, the Deputy Minority whip, Binta Bello of the PDP raised a point of order, arguing that there is no such division in the party. She notes that PDP remains one family. Binta added that as a lawmaker at the National level, making reference to crisis at the state level does not validate Igbokwe’s evidence. Lending his voice in support, Nicholas Osai, PDP said giving the provisions of the rules of the House, leadership of the house cannot give effect to Igbokwe’s letter, taking cognisance of the Supreme Court judgement that cleared the leadership tussle of the PDP. He maintained that the PDP caucus of the House must be served with a notification, for which it will respond before any further action. Wading in the debate, the leader of the house, Femi Gbajabiamila, APC said Igbokwe’s letter was only to fulfil righteousness considering the fact that he has since defected prior to the Supreme Court judgement. Making a final submission on the matter, the speaker concluded by citing section 68, subsection 2 which gave conditions for declaring the seat of a lawmaker vacant, which is by resolution. “The decision to declare a member seat vacant is not of the Senate President, is not that of the Speaker, it ultimately the decision of the house and that decision has already been taken by way of a resolution” the speaker said.