 Open new party secretariat in Abuja Ayuba Iliya | Wednesday, 20 December 2017  3:48pm  | politics The People’s Democratic Party, PDP has yet again been hit by another controversy, as another faction of the party declares independence on Wednesday. A group of five men reportedly mounted flags of PDP in location in Asokoro, Abuja declaring it the new secretariat for the main opposition party. The five men; Prince Obi Nwosu, Alhaji Hassan Adamu, Chief Olusola Akindele, Chief Godwin Duru and Franklyne Edede said their decision was motivated by the alleged imposition of the new leadership of the party with the use of a ‘unity list’. Leading the group, Obi Nwosu, said that members of the National Working Committee of his group would be announced in January next year. Emergence of the new faction follows a suit filed by one of the chairmanship aspirant in the party’s recently concluded elective convention, Taoheed Adedoja, at the federal high court Abuja, seeking the nullification of the National convention. The PDP convention was said to have been marred by series of controversies, particularly as some members of the South west region of the party feel aggrieved by what it considers a deliberate attempt to side-line them. At least seven chairmanship candidates saw the process as pre-arrange by some governors, thus stepping down from the race. They include; Chief Bode George, former Deputy National Chairman; Gbenga Daniel, Rasheed Ladoja, erstwhile Governors of Ogun and Oyo States, respectively, and Jimi Agbaje, PDP governorship candidate in Lagos State in 2015 elections. Professor Tunde Adeniran and Raymond Dokpesi, who remained in the race rejected the outcome of the election, ahead of the voting, warning about the consequences to the party. Although the National reconciliation committee of the party led by Governor of Bayelsa state, Seriake Dickson has since embarked on what appears to be a redemption mission, the effort maybe death on arrival as members begin to approach the courts.