 The Governor dissociates himself from the resolution Ayuba Iliya | Friday, 15 December 2017  5:05pm  | politics The Ekiti State
Governor, Ayodele Fayose has accused the ruling All Progressives Congress of
looting funds to plan ahead of the 2019 elections under the guise of funds to
combat terrorism. Fayose’s allegation
follows the decision of the Nigerian governors to withdraw $1 billion from the
Excess Crude Account to fight Boko Haram insurgency on Thursday. The governor who disassociated himself from
the decision of the governors stated this in a statement signed by his special assistant
on Public Communications and New Media, Lere Olayinka on Friday. Fayose was quoted as
saying: “For posterity sake, I wish to place it on record that I was not among
the governors who approved the withdrawal of almost half of our savings in the
Excess Crude Account, which belongs to the three tiers of government to fight
an already defeated insurgency,” “Since they said they
have defeated Boko Haram, what else do they need a whopping sum of $1 billion
(over N360 billion) for; if not to fund the 2019 elections? “The APC promised to
wipe out Boko Haram within six months, now it is 31 months and what the APC
government is wiping out is the economy of Nigeria and the means of livelihood
of the people.” According to him, N360
billion was equivalent to what the Federation Account Allocation Committee
(FAAC) share to the federal government, 36 States and 777 Local Councils
monthly, adding that “Nigerians deserve proper explanations from the federal
government on the rationale behind spending such huge sum of money to fight an
already defeated Boko Haram.” Challenging the federal
government to give account of the contributions of international organisations
in the anti-terrorism fight, Fayose maintained that “Even the Transparency
International (TI) once said in its report that some top military officials in
the country were feeding fat from the war against Boko Haram by creating fake
contracts and laundering the proceeds in the United States, United Kingdom and
elsewhere.” He alleged that the N50
billion kept by the Nigeria National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) in different
commercial bank accounts outside the Treasury Single Account (TSA) on the
directive of President Buhari’s Chief of Staff, Abba Kyari was part of the fund
being kept to fund President Buhari’s election in 2019. “Nigerians are alarmed
by the revelation from the House of Representatives that President Buhari
exempted NNPC from transferring N50 billion to the TSA, and the Central Bank of
Nigeria (CBN), confirmation that a letter issued by the Chief of Staff (CoS) to
the president, Abba Kyari conveyed the directive. “Also, they are miffed
by the federal government’s idea of withdrawing $1 billion from the Excess
Crude Account to fund an insurgency they said had been defeated. “They went on to tell
Nigerians that the decision was taken by governors of the 36 States, whereas,
it was solely the idea of the federal government, which they used the arranged
National Executive Council meeting to achieve. “The question is; how
can the federal government alone spend almost half of the Excess Crude money
that belongs to the three tiers of government (i.e. Federal Government, States
and Local Councils)? “The reality is that
our treasury is daily being looted in readiness for the 2019 elections.
Nigerians are therefore alerted to this lootings by the APC led federal
government to amass huge fund for the 2019 elections under the pretense of
fighting insurgency in the Northeast as well as other dubious means” Fayose
said