  Ogho Okiti | Wednesday, 04 October 2017  11:18am  | opinion There has been a spate of publications seeking to explain the
connection between productivity and income growth or improved outcomes. The
latest is the publication by McKinsey “Government Productivity: Unlocking the
US $3.5 trillion opportunity”. For the McKinsey research, the motivation is simple: in a
global environment with declining government resources following declining
appetite for increasing taxation, but confronted with increasing demands on government
expenditure on education, health, and security, increasing productivity is key
to increasing outcomes. The McKinsey report says that government across the
globe need to “deepen their functional capabilities in finance, commercial,
digital technology and data analytics areas”. From Nigeria’s perspective, there are three related problems
with public expenditure, and low productivity is just one of them. The poor
productivity is exemplified by waste, corruption, and general inefficiency.
Consequently, Nigerians do not receive fair value for government expenditure.
The other related problems are (1) inadequate public expenditure, which
accounts for less than 10% of the country’s GDP, when the global average is
34%, and (2) the structure of expenditure that prioritizes the comfort of
political and civil service office holders over expenditure on health,
education and security. Broadening the debate slightly, especially from a poor
country like Nigeria’s perspective, I reckon the recent spate of publications
are motivated by two critical issues. First, from a rich country’s
perspectives, they must continue to extract productivity gains in order to
guarantee income growth. This is especially the case in the last decade, since
the economic crisis of 2008 that income growth in most developed economies has
stalled. Secondly, from the perspective of developing economies, there
are two unique dimensions. First, until comparable productivities grow, we will
not be able to match current level of productivities in rich countries, unable
to grow income, and thus remain poor. Second, productivities have underlined
competitive dimensions, and thus lower productivity countries/companies cannot
compete, nor grow their incomes, and thus remain poor. So, there are so many ways of looking at productivity but the
simplest is looking at it as getting more from less. This dynamic value
creation is important, both from a business and country perspective. As would
be expected, there are myriads of issues that drive and constrain productivity,
and the study of productivity has therefore focused on how to continually
innovate, improve methods and processes that drive income growth. Time Economics, the consulting firm I work for, has been
probing into some of these productivity related issues, and the factors that
underline them. Recently, we concluded research work looking into the impact of
the recent nSaira’s devaluation/depreciation - presaged the dramatic fall in
oil prices - on key agriculture value chains in the Niger Delta. The value
chains that we examined are those of palm oil, cassava, aquaculture, and
poultry. The research was commissioned by the foundation for partnership
initiative in the Niger Delta (PIND) and the Market Development in the Niger
Delta (MADE) – See pindfoundation.org for the full report. The impact of the devaluation on the agricultural value
chains are based on the responses in the value chains that can be characterized
as either income or substitution effects or a combination of both. The study
found that the effects differ within and across the value chains, both in
nature and depth. These followed the rise in prices of inputs and outputs
within and across the value chains that followed devaluation of the naira and
trade restriction policies of the Federal Government. Oil palm and cassava value chains benefitted and observed
positive responses following devaluation, compared to the aquaculture and
poultry value chains. This is because both value chains had significant scope
for domestic substitutions of previously imported related value chain products. Back to our productivity analysis. While our study did not
seek to understand productivity in the agriculture value chains in the Niger
Delta, it reinforced two critical notions of productivity and income growth.
The productivity gains arose from changes to trade policies, though that was
triggered by fall in oil prices. But it reiterates the notion that policy can
influence productivity gains. Indeed, one of the critical policy question that
came from the study is the historical preference for a strong naira. While
there are prevalent supply side issues of productivity that require extensive
analysis and addressing, the historical preference for a strong naira reflects
a confrontation policy that favors consumption and not investment and
productivity growth. The second, and more importantly, is that productivity gains
are critical for income growth. Across the palm oil and cassava value chains,
income grew following the productivity gains in the value chains. Ours was a
small sample, and did not seek to understand productivity growth. But what it
showed is that, following devaluation/depreciation, Niger Delta farmers
experienced productivity gains (within the Nigerian economy) compared to their international
competitors. Following this study then, Niger Delta farmers and the
broader Nigerian farmers would not have been able to compete, and therefore
lend to increases in imports of agriculture products. In addition, because of
the preference for a strong naira, every little productivity gain following
devaluation is quickly reversed when oil price and inflation rise. In conclusion, therefore, increases in productivity in
Nigeria and in Africa will require work on both demand and supply side policies,
but especially the supply side. Across agriculture, manufacturing, information
technology, oil and gas, etc., we will not be able to deliver income growth for
the average Nigerian person and business without raising productivity, and
significantly in the medium to long term, especially when compared to the rest
of the world. I thank you.